Did you all ever do any research relating to the
dairy industry, perhaps an ice cream? We never did
anything with dairy because dairy is not exactly a
hot topic in this particular area. See, I thought
there might be an ice cream business in Washington
County that might have had some link. We are very
protective of the ice cream business, and we don't
want to cast anything. dispersion of dairy cattle
to have any problem. They don't all live in
Washington County. As you look back now I'm
serious again, as you look back on your years as
department head, were there any research
possibilities that were overlooked, but you now
realize Oh, wish we'd done this or that?
We did about all we could do because research
depended mainly upon somebody supporting it.
That, of course, comes from the fact that the
university thinks that it should be funded
research if it's going to be important. And I was
told very strongly one time that we're doing
research. We're studying natural diseases.
We're publishing. And they said, well, that
doesn't count, because if it doesn't bring money
in, then it's not important. I personally was
impatient. Some of my faculty did not perceive
that the university members should have a
curiosity and wish to pursue new knowledge,
because they didn't feel that way, I guess. So I
think there were opportunities that were lost
there. During your years as department head,
about what percentage of the budget for the
department came from outside funding, outside
the university? I don't have any figures on that.
In the
middle 70s, we had a considerable budget, and I
don't remember how many positions we had that were
paid out of research, but there were five or six, I
think. All right, and those outside sources, what
were some of them? Well, we had support, like I told
you, from the Kleberg Foundation, the National
Institute for Health. There were several
programs with that around storage, had stuff on
neurologic disease and pathogenesis of that. I
don't know if you know what pathology and
pathogenesis are the key word. How does it come
about? And if you know how it comes about, then you
know how to interact with it. And we have worked,
did some other work in collaboration with others.
Adams, for example, worked with a disease in
horses. that eating a type of Johnson grass that
causes the inflammation of the bladder. And then
what it really tied down to was that it was a form of
prussic acid poisoning. Horses being unique,
like cattle, it affects their blood. And they have
the oxygen carrying capacity, so they die from an
oxygen. But in horses, it's a slow process that
affects the nerves. And we worked that out fairly
well. And I thought it was an excellent experiment
in the study of disease, although that disease is
not highly important, except it's important to
horse people to try to raise their horses on. What
was it that you did your masters on? That was just a
study of the relationship of bacteria to renal
disease. Was there anybody in the department that
was the most successful grant getter, outside
funding getter?
That would be hard to say. We had a program which
finally
worked as a In collaboration with the Parks and
Wildlife, we developed a wild animal season
program that came in and did very well and that was
finally integrated with the Institute of
Tropical Veterinarian Medicine. There's a
frequency of people trying to reorganize things.
The doctoral program was in existence when you
became department head, and it grew to about how
many students per year during your? I think we had
12 to 13 at one time. So you'd have three, four, five
degrees doctoral per year completed? Yeah, that
time off took five, six years. It depends on the
aggressiveness of the individuals and their
resourcefulness. That's probably how it
arrived, I guess. And the department's funding
came partly from the Ag Experiment Station? After
I became department head and soon after, well,
when Ballantyne came, he set up a department of
veterinary science, which worked through the
Experiment Station. And finally then that was
broken up into departments. It was only after I
became department head, Hilton Smith had a little
problem with the Experiment Station because of
his prior experience with them, and he refused to
work with them except on his terms. And so then Al
set that up and put me part-time at the Experiment
Station, and we started And it was a significant
part then in later years. Any from the Extension
Service? We really haven't had any relationship
with Extension Service, per se. Were there any
other state agency funding sources? Yes, we had
$40,000 to $50,000, which today multiplied that
today in the We had studied the diseases of deer and
things like that, and Mick Robinson started it.
One individual left, and then Mick Robinson took
it over. Any research that you remember as really
fun, pleasant, really enjoyable? The research
that I did, I enjoyed. was that study of natural
disease. And that, where you take what's there and
try to figure it out. And I think the fossilization
problem was one. Another thing we did with the
physiology was on what they call crazy cow
disease. And that was a selenium toxicity. And on
selenium, the species included tomato and
potato. And they have solanins that are in there
that force in the nervous system. And working that
out.
Ken had a project that he worked on, on his
dissertation on a project on hip dysplasia of
dogs, about chemistry of that in relation to
hormones. And the problem with that was that to not
become fun because it was such a logistic problem
raising dogs. We had about 300 dogs, Walker and
American Foxhounds out there at one time. And like
I say, that's not fun. When you retired in 76 as
department head? Oh, yeah, in 77. 77. When you
retired in 77, do you think that veterinary
pathology nationally, our veterinary pathology
program, would have been the highest ranked of the
veterinary programs here? In ranking
nationally, I would say within the top four. And
who were the others? I think Cornell and Michigan.
Okay. And Colorado wasn't bad. Would there have
been anybody else, any other department, any
program here in the top three, four, five?
The graduate programs would be hard to relate. The
programs in focal diseases were strong as far as
the research and the individual students, but
they didn't have the PSD programs. Dr.
Price retired in the early 70s, and we looked for a
new dean and ended up bringing back from Missouri a
man that had gone to school at Texas A&M. Do you
remember that search?
For dean? Mm-hmm. I don't remember any in
particular detail. All right. How did you all feel
when Dr. Shelton was selected? I thought I was
pleased, basically. George is not a hard person to
get along with, and sometimes that was his fault.
I think we did well with George.
Everybody has their own peculiarities and you
perceive them differently. I was chairman of that
committee, so I'm... Well, I figured that the
reason he was selected because the board of
directors from his hometown picked him. Oh, I
hadn't thought about that, no. Those things
always come up, Haskell, you know that. Typist,
this can be an editorial note. When I went in as
chairman of the search committee, I went in to Dr.
Williams as president to report to him and Vice
President Calhoun, and I had gone back personally
to each of the subgroups that had been involved in
the interview process. the faculty
representative, the student representatives,
the former student representatives, U
department heads, and so forth. And I'd ask each
group to rate all of the interviewees. And it was my
fault, I now realize it was foolish, my fault that
we had interviewed eight prospective deans.
That's far too many. Shouldn't have had that many.
But I had them each rate and gave eight points to the
one they ranked first and right on down. There were
two that came out far above all the others. A man who
had been for a couple of years the dean at Ohio
State, and then he literally told them to take the
job and shove it, and he had left Ohio State in real
anger, and they were angry at him and he was angry at
them, and he had gone to Georgia just as a faculty
member. And the other one was Dr. Shelton. And in my
summary to President Williams, I said, oh, this
man that's now in Georgia, he'll be exciting. Now,
there'll be all kinds of things. You know,
there'll be explosions. There'll be anger. But I
mean, that place will really be hopping. He said,
tell me about this other man. I said, well, I think
he's calm. He's methodical. People can work with
him. He will work well, but quietly sort of, out
there with the former students. He'll work with
the various constituencies. And Dr. Williams
quickly said, let's go with this second guy. He
said, I've got enough damn excitement in my life.
Were there any changes in style from Dean Price to
Dean Shelton? any way that the dean's office did
things? I don't remember much change.
I perceive that Dr. Sheldon was a little more
student-oriented
than Al. Al was rather pragmatic, and as I told you
before, he was a manager and a leader. That was the
only difference I saw, and Doc Sheldon was
depending a lot more on opinions than Al did. And he
met regularly with you, department heads? Now who
under Dean Price, was there an associate dean?
Wallace Bay. Wallace Bay was the last. No,
Shelton. Shelton selected him. Oh, Shelton? Oh,
no, I know. Lyndon Kurtz was with Al, but he was not a
veterinarian. Jack Murray was assistant dean.
Oh, okay. Was there anybody who was clearly the
second in command? That's what I was asking, where
I'm headed. Under Dean Price? Dean Price?
Well, until he appointed a dean of research there
wasn't, I think. Who was that? Fred Mauer. Fred
Mauer. Oh, yeah, M-A-U-R-E-R.
Otherwise, I joked when I say the secretary. All
right. Then when Dean Shelton, Joy Shelton, he
soon appointed Wally Bay as the associate dean. He
took him out of pathology. Don't pull that coffee
cup off if it's got coffee in it. No, he didn't. He
took him out of pathology. Yeah. Had you hired Dr.
Bay? Describe him and his manner and style. a quiet
gentleman of all, and a very congenial person, and
as loyal an associate as you'd want to be the best
next to me. Right. And in the way the leadership
operated, if Dean, if you needed an answer and you
could not contact Dean Shelton, Could Wally Bay
answer for him? Could he say yes or no? I don't know
that I ever tested that. Wallace would go along a
lot and Doc Sheldon, he would ask opinions and kind
of lead discussions and things like that and
decisions would be made. I never perceived that
Wallace took to a firm directorship of anything.
During all of your years on the faculty in
veterinary medicine, do you remember any
big complaints or examples of displeasure by the
public out there wanting veterinary medicine to
do something that they thought they weren't
doing?
There was always a problem with a selection
committee. Oh, and admissions? Oh, yeah. Those
things, and I think that occasionally something
would happen with the clinic that people were
upset with. Other than that, I don't remember
anything. I don't remember anything. Yeah. We
were told in a way, politically, we were told to
keep our hands off. And we really then, the program
in veterinary medicine is you work with the
practitioners. And that's basically it. Some
people will bring animals in. All right. During
your entire experience, how did the profession of
veterinary medicine in Texas change? What were
the major shifts? Well, I think it became a lot more
sophisticated and international than they
expected.
Actually, we produced quite a few graduates
during this time. I remember that 64 and then 128
veterinarians and they began to, I think, in a way
saturate the and of course those people were more
innovative. They went into different fields. I
think it was put into public health and things of
this nature.
And all things change, and I think modernization,
you might say, is the essence of it. They also went
into more exotic animals and birds, didn't they?
Oh, yeah. I guess the biggest thing to me was the
development of equine practitioners, for
example.
Give some examples of some of the most unusual
animals or research or whatever it might be that
you remember dealing with yourself. There must
have been some very unusual problems y'all had to
solve. Mick Robinson had a very interesting one
that we never really resolved. The deer in the
Everest Plateau area, or at least that area, there
were certain red granite gravel areas that when
the deer would would have sexual transformation.
I mean, they would lose their maleness and their
antlers would never harden. And I think we sort of
looked at that for years. And
we had the usual things that happened. You'd get a
tiger here and occasionally even an elephant.
Where would they come from? Well, usually from
zoos or traveling zoos. Oh, okay. Either that or we
would get them here, but they are the referrals
with tigers and
occasionally we would get
exotic parrots and things like that. Do you
remember any famous person's animal or animals?
that y'all had to help with?
I don't. We've got to stay clear of the people. So
you didn't, no governors, no Mr. Rutter's dog, you
didn't help with Ranger or anything like that?
Most of those went after the clinic. That's what I
thought. Anything
we did, We gave the report to the clinic and the
clinic then represented what was stored. And as
far as
the clinician is responsible, we found this or
that and this kind of thing. Do you remember any
effort by anybody outside veterinary medicine to
tell you all that you must or must not do any task?
Did any board member, politician, rich person,
outside university administrator ever tried to
micromanage?
No, I think we were isolated pretty much from that
because they'd go to the clinic or something like
that and they, there were certain things that
happened there that I would not want to name. It
couldn't really be a legitimate answer. We were
forced to, we had to, of course faculty members
that would make mistakes, they'd like to us as
pathologists to handle that for them, but that was
another story. During your years on the faculty,
were you on the admissions committee ever? In the
early years, yes. In the early years. Describe
what that was like. It was not, until those years,
it was not a real problem except that where can we
get enough people to fill this that are really
unqualified. There was a period in there that when
we expanded over that that was the case. Was that
when first went from 64 to 128? I think that was the
general basic time, and they, there were a lot of
students, you know, they just barely could stay in
A&M. They were applying, and the question I...
Compare the quality of the students in your later
year, your last years, with the quality of the
students in your first years on the faculty.
The students in the later years were academically
much more sophisticated. And I remember some of
those students, the low score of their GPR might
have been a 3.4 or something like that. Where in the
early years, particularly in the classes which I
went through, that if you passed, you were in.
And back in those years, again, because of the way
the dynamics of the situation were, some students
took six, seven years to get through. They just
retook courses until they passed, because there
was no such thing as there's so many slots. And in
the later years, of course, if you missed out, then
you were out and you had to reapply to get back in if
you missed or failed a course. As coeducation
began to be discussed here in the 60s, what did you
and your colleagues in veterinary medicine think
about the idea of coeducation? Well, I don't think
there was any opposition to it. They thought it was
rather incredulous that some young lay would want
to do some of the things that veterinarians do. But
that's the maleness of the mind, I think, and we've
been educated. At
that time, in the early 60s, were there many women
nationally in veterinary medicine?
I don't remember a lot. I think we went through the
similar situation in most of them, although a lot
of them did not have the restrictions that we had.
In pathology, a lot of them, the women, for
example, went into pathology because it was did
not have the, it was a laboratory science, you
might say. And it was easier for them to, just
women, to become involved in. And they were some
very, very competent individuals that did that.
And today, what's happening in veterinary
pathology is just like it is in many, many new women
in veterinary pathology. Do you remember any
important experiences in the department, either
serious or humorous, as women became members of
the student body?
Not that I want to repeat. The selection committee
has some interesting stories.
the whales or the applicants. Were there some
anecdotes and stories that faculty members used
to tell that needed some censoring after
coeducation began? There
were some people that were rather, I guess they
were sensitive. But I don't know that there was a
bunch of them. I think most of the people at that age
that had been in medicine were pretty civilized,
I'll say, or timid, either one way. Do you
remember, as department head, having to deal with
any problem that was gender related with a
student?
Not particularly, no. Not in your department? No.
That's what I was meaning. We had a rather smooth
sailing I think. Our department was rather stern
and felt that it
had a serious charge to do. If you could perceive
Ken Pierce as you would expect him to relate to
students. I don't think the department is set that
way.
For me as dean of faculties, the major problems
that bounced to me relating to the entire program
of veterinary medicine were the admissions. That
here was a good student who didn't get in because
here were that many more that were better. And the
one I particularly remember, I was in Dr.
Williams' office when he got a long-distance call
from Oscar Wyatt, who literally was cussing him
out. I could hear he was yelling at him, and Dr.
Williams at first was mad, and then he started
laughing and held the phone out where I could hear
it. And Wyatt said, U.S.O.B., I'm going to get you
fired. And apparently he had promised his
secretary that he could get her nephew or
something or other, and his record was pitiful.
Well, when Dr. Williams hung up the phone, he
turned to me and seriously said, let me ask, you
know, let me throw an idea at you. He said, what if I
were to tell Veterinary Medicine to give 10 slots
to be identified as presidential admissions?
What do you think? I said, Dr. Williams, as soon as
that word spreads, you will need 10 times 10 times
10. There won't be enough slots if they're going to
be done on that basis.
then and then he said yeah he said i didn't think it
was work and i told him that i had never heard of that
anywhere else uh like that and i said and i said why
don't you to i know mr white won't be satisfied but
to rational people tell them you know here's the
search committee i don't pick them there's a group
that does that they're serious They may make a
mistake, but if so, it's an honest mistake. But I,
as the president, am not going to reach down. Well,
that's what he tried to do. Yeah, yeah, because
it's not going to work. Well, let's see. All your
years in veterinary medicine, of what are you most
proud?
I'm proud of our students. And I'm particularly
proud of our graduate program and the students and
how they responded to it. I think that we did a
creditable job with the thing we have in advancing
veterinary pathology. And I think we represented
the state quite well.
What else?
Well, I'm proud of the university for what it's
done and the state for what it's done to tend back at
it. And I think that sometimes it's a little bit
embarrassing how they have protected this
institution.